Author docs for Atom's render pipelines (#895)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/atom-guide/dev-guide/render_pipelines.md

---
title: "Render Pipelines"
description: "You can use pre-built render pipelines or create custom ones in Atom Renderer, the graphics engine integrated into Open 3D Engine (O3DE)."
toc: false
---

> A *render pipeline* describes a sequence of steps to render a 3D scene to a 2D screen. In **Atom Renderer**, the render pipeline is completely modular and driven by a series of passes. This allows you to customize the render pipeline at a feature level (such as shadows, lighting, and post effects) or by changing the rendering technique completely (such as to Deferred, Checkerboard, or Forward+). By default, Atom implements *Forward+* rendering in its pre-built render pipelines.

Reviewer: Reply to edit suggestion: "feature level" is a specific term in Direct3D, so I think that term can remain. I wonder, though, if it would be more precise and still accurate to say "...allows you to customize the render pipeline for a specific feature level..."? Otherwise, I'm not sure I understand the nuance of customizing the pipeline _at_ a feature level.

> A *render pipeline* describes a sequence of steps to render a 3D scene to a 2D screen. In **Atom Renderer**, the render pipeline is completely modular and driven by a series of passes. This allows you to customize the render pipeline at a feature level (such as shadows, lighting, and post effects) or by changing the rendering technique completely (such as to Deferred, Checkerboard, or Forward+). By default, Atom implements *Forward+* rendering in its pre-built render pipelines.

Reviewer: Gotcha. Then to avoid confusion, I would definitely avoid the use of the phrase "feature levels" here. I thought you were trying to work that in.

| Directional shadows | Cascaded shadowmap to simulate sun light. | Yes | Yes |
| Punctual shadows | Shadows for punctual light types: point and spot lights. | Yes | Yes |
| Area lights | Spherical, disk, capsule, quad, and polygonal lights. | Yes | Yes |
| Light culling | Tile-based or cluster-based light culling for efficient light iteration in the Forward+ pass. | Yes | Yes |
| RTX global illumination | Real-time global illumination that uses NVIDIA RTXGI (RTX Global Illumination). | Yes | No |
| Reflection probe | Generates and uses reflection probes for specular image-based lighting (IBL). | Yes | Yes |
| Physically-based sky | Basic sky rendering that uses physically-based atmospheric modeling. | Yes | No |
| HDR Skybox | Uses an HDR image as a skybox. | Yes | Yes |
| Screen-space ambient occlusion (SSAO) | Applies SSAO to the scene to create contact shadows where objects meet.  | Yes | No |
| Subsurface scattering | Calculates subsurface scattering for materials (such as skin) by using a screen space technique. | Yes | No |
| Deferred fog | Applies a height-based fog to the scene. | Yes | No |

> | Screen space reflections (SSR) | Implements SSR by using renderered lighting buffer to approximate real-time reflections. | Yes | No |

Reviewer: Hyphen? (A hyphen was used earlier for SSAO.)
```suggestion
| Screen-space reflections (SSR) | Implements SSR by using renderered lighting buffer to approximate real-time reflections. | Yes | No |
```

> | Depth of field | Applies a bokeh-shaped depth of field effect to the scene that's based on the scene's depth and camera focus paramters. | Yes | No |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Depth of field | Applies a bokeh-shaped depth of field effect to the scene that's based on the scene's depth and camera focus parameters. | Yes | No |
```

| Bloom | Applies a bloom effect to the rendered image, making bright pixels bleed out into neighboring pixels. | Yes | No |
| Subpixel morphological anti-aliasing (SMAA) | Applies SMAA as an anti-aliasing technique. | Yes | No |
| Temporal anti-aliasing (TAA) | TAA uses motion vectors and temporal super-sampling to reduce aliasing in the final image. | Yes | No |
| Light adaptation | Adjusts brightness of the final image based on the scene's average luminance, so the image appears neither too dark nor too bright. | Yes | Yes |
| Look modification and color grading | Allows artists to adjust the final look of the image by using look up tables (LUTs). | Yes | Yes |
| Display mapping | Adjusts the color values of the final image based on the color range that the screen expects. | Yes | Yes |
| User interface (UI) | Renders 2D UI components. | Yes | Yes |

> | Auxilary geometry (AuxGeom) | Renders various geometry and text for in-editor tools and debugging, such as gizmos, grids, debug lines, and shapes. | Yes | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Auxiliary geometry (AuxGeom) | Renders various geometry and text for in-editor tools and debugging, such as gizmos, grids, debug lines, and shapes. | Yes | Yes |
```

## File structure

> A render pipeline is stored as an `.azasset` file, which is a JSON file that links to the root pass of the render pipeline and contains other configurations. In this file, the `RootPassTemplate` parameter contains the name of pipeline's root pass.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A render pipeline is stored as an `.azasset` file, which is a JSON file that links to the root pass of the render pipeline and contains other configurations. In this file, the `RootPassTemplate` parameter contains the name of the pipeline's root pass.
```

> The following example is the `MainRenderPipeline.azasset` file. The root pass template is called `MainPipeline`, which links to the `MainPipeline.pass` file. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example is the `MainRenderPipeline.azasset` file. The root pass template is called `MainPipeline` and links to the `MainPipeline.pass` file.
```

```json
{
    "Type": "JsonSerialization",
    "Version": 1,
    "ClassName": "RenderPipelineDescriptor",
    "ClassData": {
        "Name": "MainPipeline",
        "MainViewTag": "MainCamera",
        "RootPassTemplate": "MainPipeline",
        "RenderSettings": {
            "MultisampleState": {
                "samples": 4
            }
        }
    }
}

```

You can find the following render pipeline files in your O3DE engine source:
- **Main Rendering Pipeline**: `Gems\Atom\Feature\Common\Assets\Passes\MainRenderPipeline.azasset`
- **Low-end Rendering Pipeline**: `Gems\Atom\Feature\Common\Assets\Passes\LowEndRenderPipeline.azasset`

## Modifying the render pipeline

> Since the render pipeline is driven by modular passes, it's easy to add or remove passes and update connections. You can modify the main render pipeline, or create a custom render pipeline for your team. You may want to use a custom render pipeline for a number of reasons, such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since modular passes drive the render pipeline, it's easy to add or remove passes and update connections. You can modify the main render pipeline or create a custom render pipeline for your team. You might want to use a custom render pipeline for a number of reasons, such as:
```
* In the first sentence:
  * Revised for active voice.
  * Consider avoiding calling this "easy", which can be condescending to a reader.

> - to develop new features that impact the render pipeline
> - to implement and use alternative rendering techniques
> - to improve rendering performance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To develop new features that impact the render pipeline.
- To implement and use alternative rendering techniques.
- To improve rendering performance.
```
* Make list items sentence case, even if they continue a sentence from the list intro.
* Add end punctuation to these _because_ they continue a sentence.
* Consider moving "to" up to the list intro ("such as to:"/"for example, to:") and leading with the imperative verbs here ("Develop..."/"Implement..."/"Improve...").

> Modifying the render pipeline involves inserting or removing a pass and updating the connections. You can do this directly by manually editing the `MainPipeline.pass` with a text editor.

Reviewer: Is there a simple example that can be used to illustrate what "inserting a pass and updating the connections" looks like?

Author: I changed the wording to "enable" and "disable". This is the most common use case engineers will encounter.
